working with topcast where today I'll be
talking about chapter seven hits and
false alarms subtitled signal detection
and statistical decision Theory from
Stephen pinker's book rationality I'm
not going to get far through the chapter
today indeed just a couple of pages
because it's going to set the scene for
the way in which you will see the rest
of the chapter is going to go this
chapter follows on from the previous two
which were of course about Bayesian
reasoning and rational Choice Theory
okay so all about the uses of
probability and statistics and here
we're going even deeper into the whole
of statistical thinking and how
statistical thinking might be used in
order to make decisions I'm going to
have a lot of criticisms about this very
early on and so it might be frustrating
to The Listener and I apologize for that
up front as well as stopping and
starting and we're not going to get very
far through the chapter I'm going to
make very little progress but there's no
way around because early on Professor
Pinker is making a whole bunch of
competing claims making a bunch of
claims that are at odds with the things
that I talk about on topcasts so very
often and I think it's important to
again as I keep on saying in my
discussion of this book to compare what
is mainstream academic intellectual
musings on this topic of rationality
with what I would simply regard as
actual rationality actual epistemology
as explained by Carl popper and David
Deutsch unfortunately ignored in a book
like this and shouldn't be because it
really is that epistemology really is
the way in which we can come to a
rational understanding of the world
using our reason this chapter contains a
lot of misconceptions but whatever the
case chapter 7 hits and false alarms
it's basically a summary of the previous
two chapters and going a little bit
further to try and explain why ways in
which Bayesian reasoning and the use of
probability and now statistics can be
utilized in making decisions I'm going
to have multiple problems throughout
this chapter with the way in which
examples attempt to be deployed because
as I've been saying on other episodes of
topcast recently it seems to me that in
academic philosophy and this is really
what we're doing here we're doing a form
of epistemology which is a branch of
philosophy that when people engage in
this sort of theorizing about how
thinking and reasoning are done or
should be done most rationally let's say
how rationality Works they do so in the
abstract and when they try to bring it
into the real world by talking about
specific examples it's still a fictional
example a thought experiment of some
kind or imagine this scenario rather
than giving us something precise with
meat on the bone something with a a
place and a time and a date people
involved where they actually use this
staff this is one of the reasons that
the work of Carl popper and David
Deutsch appeals to me because we don't
talk about just stuff occurring in the
abstract Carl Poppa talks about what
particular scientists did and when what
particular thinkers were thinking at a
particular time and how they disagreed
with other thinkers and how to resolve
these conflicts between ideas which we
call problems popper wanted to
understand my Trope example that I
always go to as to how it was that the
transition was made from Newtonian
gravity through to Einstein's theory of
general relativity what was the role of
eddington's experiment in this this is
why I go to this particular example so
often it's a neat example but it also
exists as a model for every other kind
of situation involved in competing ideas
where we need to make as this chapter
will come to a decision a decision about
what is the best theory what is the best
idea what is the best explanation an
explanation is a word that is sorely
missing from this chapter unfortunately
it's not to say that it's wholly
misconceived there are parts of
rationality the book by Stephen Pinker
that indeed hit the nail on the head but
it's the important misconceptions that
are worth lingering over recently on
topcast I've also been talking about
part of Papa's paper or lecture rather
on the sources of knowledge and of
ignorance
and what is amazing about this paper
apart from the fact that it is just
written so clearly it provides you with
specific cases of philosophers engaged
in debates and engaged in trying to make
progress in philosophy itself in trying
to solve problems and to make progress
and they do and papa speaks about the
escape from authoritarianism the
deference that people used to have
sometimes we still do but used to have
for the priests or for the medicine man
or for the king and so on and so forth
we escaped from that through empiricism
a famous empiricist was Francis Bacon an
Englishman who figured out that
observation had a key role to play in
coming to understand the world I got the
details wrong but at least he understood
that each person individually could use
their senses in order to try and uncover
the truth they didn't have to defer to
the king into the priest they had their
own senses they had their own way of
getting information and checking their
ideas against reality now of course
Bacon's thought that you could just see
the facts of reality it got kind of that
wrong and simultaneously over in Europe
the rationalists chief among them that
Papa talks about is Renee Descartes and
what Descartes was doing was speaking
about the use of rationality the use of
reason and how it didn't go wrong it was
the way in which you could avoid error
so he partly got the idea indeed it is a
way to help correct errors it's just
that you can't avoid them all together
you can't see the truth both of these
ideas pure reason of the Cartesian kind
and empiricism of Bacon's kind endorsed
the idea of manifest truth and so
ultimately they got things wrong and in
fact led to a whole bunch of terrible
errors once people think they're in
possession of the Manifest truth once
they think that they can see and
identify truth in the world they are
liable to fall into tyranny and this is
Papa's great quip that manifest truth is
the root of all tyranny nevertheless
nevertheless despite the errors and
misconceptions in those two ideas
empiricism and pure reason there is
still truth to be found there there is
still something correct in those ideas
there is virtue in endorsing the idea
that yes observation is important yes
reason is important these things
together are an escape from Authority
it's just a the way in which these early
philosophers conceived of it wasn't
quite right that in both cases we are
fallible we need these things but we're
still fallible and we can still generate
knowledge although that is going to be
error-prone but it's only through our
observations and deployment of reason
that we can continue to correct errors
and make progress so there's virtue in
the misconception and there is virtue in
the misconception today that we'll talk
about when it comes to rationality it's
just a shame that so few people
understand and appreciate popper even
now publishing books in in 2020 2021 22
22 so this may get a little bit
frustrating to begin with I I just don't
find it's going to be Illuminating for
my particular audience you will see that
the errors are coming at us thick and
fast and so we're going to be pausing
and just recognizing the errors are
there and we can conclude where one is
going to go with this style of thinking
where the author is going to go with the
style of thinking that he endorses and I
must say early on he he begins really
well with a concept of uncertainty but
quickly falls back into let's say
manifest truth errors so Pinker writes
at the beginning here quote
rationality requires that we distinguish
what is true from what we want to be
true that we not bury our heads in the
sand build castles in the air or decide
that the grapes just Out Of Reach are
sour
The Temptations of Wishful and magical
thinking are always with us because our
fortunes hinge on the state of the world
which we can never know with certainty
end quote now that ending there of that
section is beautiful absolutely we can
never know with certainty so here he is
endorsing a form of fallibalism will he
continue with this attitude well we'll
come to see that he doesn't quite and
that's a shame he seems to forget rather
quickly what he's just said there about
and it's impossible to know with
absolute certainty but this doesn't deny
us the capacity to know because to know
does not mean to be certain of to be
certain of these are separate things
indeed certainty is a feeling and a
feeling is not the way we cash out
knowledge claims knowledge claims are
objective independent of how we feel
about them call it certainty or not this
is why probabilities is inherently
subjective different people place
different values on how certain they are
about something so picker has begun
reasonably well reasonably well he does
say there at the very beginning that
rationality requires that we distinguish
what is true from what we want to be
true yes kind of I'll give him a pass
there but of course we don't know what
is true so really what rationality is
doing is allowing us to distinguish
between what we know to be an error and
what we do not know yet contains error
and and so we can sift between again
Newtonian gravity and Einstein's general
relativity because we haven't found any
errors with Einstein general relativity
it works it's a an explanation and
description of reality but we've found
errors errors with Newtonian gravity it
postulates a force it postulates action
at a distance it says there's an inverse
Square law where strictly there's
non-inverse Square law so it's making
multiple errors useful as it is in many
circumstances it fails catastrophically
in other circumstances okay so it's not
so much distinguishing what is true
namely we do not regard general
relativity is this true but rather to
distinguish between what we know is
false which is to say we have an
explanation of how it's false and why
Newtonian gravity but we do not yet know
how general relativity is false we
expect it to turn out false in the final
analysis one day there will be a
successor Theory to it so we expect it
to be false we just don't know how it's
false yet so this is really the purpose
of rationality this is the better way to
have started this particular chapter
nonetheless we'll give him a pass and we
will say that we can't know with
certainty is very good okay he says that
we can never know with certainty
excellent full marks on that
I shouldn't be grading it but okay let's
keep going and he writes quote to keep
up on our gumption and Safeguard against
taking painful measures that may prove
unnecessary we are apt to see what we
want to see and disregard the rest we
teach her on the edge of the bathroom
scale in a way that minimizes our weight
procrastinate getting a medical test and
may return an unwelcome result and try
to believe that human nature is
infinitely malleable end quote now this
is telling in the sense that of course
Stephen Pinker is a very accomplished
renowned psychologist cognitive
scientist so he is fixated very much on
the individual on the person moving
about their day-to-day life now the
rules do not change so far as I am
concerned of course it's just that a
person's individual reasoning in their
individual day-to-day life is sometimes
not something that is easily accessible
to the average person you are not
readily able to understand your own
thoughts this is why popularian
philosophy preparing epistemology is
richer because we can all all of us
objectively look at historic examples of
what's going on in science and how
knowledge was created there how
knowledge is created there it's
precisely how learning occurs in an
individual person how errors are
corrected in science is how you go about
correcting errors in your own life
moving around your own life but it's
useful to be able to talk about the
common knowledge the common knowledge we
have of historic events historic
philosophers historic scientists
particular problems that are out there
in the world that we can talk about
these instances and examples of where
the general abstract philosophy comes to
bear on these things if we begin to talk
about these yes they're interesting
quirky somewhat humorous ideas that you
know someone will stand on a scale in a
way that minimizes their weight well if
they are concerned about being
overweight yes this is a thing that
happens now but these are not so
interesting I think to me and to some
other people who are interested in
epistemology and rationality
epistemology and rationality if you're
interested in the peculiarities of human
psychology then yes okay okay and this
may be where Pink is coming from but it
just means that some of these examples
are harder to talk about and whether or
not the conclusion is drawn about a
particular individual person's
irrationality generalizes to the broader
case of rationality is another matter I
think that I can draw the conclusions
about what is happening in the
philosophy of physics and extend that
out to the philosophy of science more
broadly and extend that out to reasoning
more broadly because we can talk about
these specific examples but whether or
not we can take one person's peccadillos
about standing on scales okay okay
that's a particular example or
procrastinating getting a medical
Testament to return an unwelcome result
yes these are things that people do out
of fear you're an emotion and that kind
of thing but the whole point of Science
and rationality is that we should aim to
be taking away the emotion distilling it
out in some way shape or form except for
the Curiosity of course we want to keep
the Curiosity there what's going on and
many scientists and philosophers have
made this point before what's going on
in Sciences we have a third person
approach to these things it doesn't
matter how people feel about stuff but
of course psychology is very much
focused on how people feel about stuff
and trying to resolve particularly
individual problems but
that's not so much an objective science
at the moment it's not a precise
objective science at the moment because
it's about the contents of people's
subjective Minds let's just anyway go
back to the book and just focus on what
he says at the end of this particular
paragraph so it's worth reading that
sentence again
apologies to the reader I'm going back
he says quote we teach her on the edge
of the bathroom scale in a way that
minimizes our weight procrastinate
getting a medical test that may return
an unwelcome result and try to believe
that human nature is infinitely
malleable end quote
and that last bit there is just an
unfortunate fallacy especially from a
psychologist and a renowned psychologist
at that someone who clearly does not
understand
universality now perhaps universality is
a new idea Cutting Edge epistemology and
psychology perhaps but it's true
we can understand anything that is
understandable we can understand any
physical phenomena because any physical
phenomena is computable which
explanations are a kind of computation
we can construct explanations about
physical phenomena out there in the
universe and that includes ourselves in
other words human nature is infinitely
malleable this is not a bias or a
Prejudice or an error it simply is the
case that it's infinitely malleable now
whether or not we can as a matter of
personal psychology go about solving our
problems and getting over our
anti-rational memes as we say here well
that's another matter but in principle
we're infinitely malleable and to deny
that we're infinitely malleable it's
just an error it's a misconception so we
should well believe I don't like that
word okay we should understand that it
simply is the case that our best
explanation of what human Minds can do
is to be infinite malleable is to take
on any problem and solve it to become
the kind of person that you want to you
are infinitely malleable and it's a
pessimistic idea I would say for a
psychologist to be telling the reader
that they can't do anything they like
with their mind but they can but
Professor Pinker like so many others the
Brit weinsteins of the world and other
famous psychologists I think Jordan
Peterson and daughter endorses a version
of this idea
we inherit certain genes and the genes
of the things that cause us to behave in
certain ways and these things are just
baked in to our psychology and this is
false this is wrong we can change our
minds it doesn't matter what the
antecedents are of the ideas the idea
might be genetic okay let's grant that
and I don't know if it's true but let's
grant that some ideas come from the DNA
okay they're implanted in there in the
DNA and they they they're they're fixed
in the brain and then they're part of
our mind but the mind is not the brain
the mind can change itself the mind is
infinitely malleable doesn't matter what
the genes say after all as David Deutsch
has pointed out we might all have genes
for survival genes for let's say eating
stuff
but people routinely go on diets and
refuse to eat people sadly commit
suicide as well so if we have these
genes for survival and eating how is it
that we explain that some people defy
this genetic compulsion this genetic
requirement this genetically determined
Behavior well of course I suppose The
evolutionary psychologists come back and
say well they've got a quirky Gene
they've got a mutation that determines
that they do the opposite thing which of
course is what do we say a bad
explanation because it can explain any
sort of behavior it can explain anything
at all whereas we say it's the memes and
the ideas that explain people's behavior
and that's not easily variable because
you need to talk about
specific ideas and by the way no one's
ever identified specific genes as
causing specific ideas so that's another
matter so let's keep going this is a
very slow process through this chapter
he then goes on to say quote there is a
more rational way to reconciliate
ignorance with our desires the tool of
Reason called signal detection Theory
or statistical decision Theory it
combines the big ideas of the two
preceding chapters estimating the
probability that something is true of
the world Bayesian reasoning and
deciding what to do about it by weighing
its expected costs and benefits rational
Choice end quote okay so he's going to
be relying upon the two pillars that are
made entirely of misconceptions from the
previous chapters Bayesian reasoning
which is about a probabilistic
assessment of your options when usually
you don't have that many options to
assess you either have one and if you're
lucky you have two and of course you can
do a crucial test to figure out which
one is to be refuted and rational Choice
which as we've said before we cannot
have these fixed set of rules that
determine what our most rational Choice
should be because rather often the best
choice to make is the one not yet
created and we need to create that
choice we need to bring it into being so
it's not choosing among existing options
let alone weighing those options it's
creating new options which are better
than all the existing ones and once you
have that one that's better than all the
existing ones there's no role for
waiting or Bayesian reasoning you just
do the best thing you follow the good
explanation because all the others are
bad explanations By the Light of the
existence of a solitary single good
explanation we're about to see this in
the next paragraph where Pinker tries to
conjure a bunch of examples but the
examples are too abstract and when taken
seriously and looked at carefully we
will see there's no role for base in
reasoning or rational Choice Theory
there's a role instead for wants the
best explanation so let's read what he
has to say quote the signal detection
challenge is whether to treat some
indicator as a genuine signal from the
world or as noise in our imperfect
perception of it it's a recurring
dilemma in life a century sees a blip on
a radar screen are we being attacked by
nuclear bombers or is it a flock of
seagulls end quote so here's our first
example from the supposed real world so
Pinker is going to throughout this
chapter make a big deal of the historic
origins of signal detection Theory and
this is a quirk this is a quirky kind of
idea signal detection theory was
invented or arose out of early use of
radar in World War II and the radar was
primitive and it had all sorts of
problems and in these early radar
signals you would have seen them in
movies and so on and so forth unless
there are any actual radar operators out
there listening to me what happened was
you had a series of concentric rings and
then there was a sweeping line that went
around and if the radar detected
something it'd go beep beep and little
dots would flash up on the screen which
would indicate something that would
indicate something now the question for
Signal detection is well are you
detecting enemy aircraft or are you
detecting a flock of birds or something
else okay so do we generalize from this
situation to the rest of physical
reality and the rest of decision Theory
it's rather like the idea of well
cardano invented the early versions of
probability theory for figuring out the
rules and how to win at games of chance
and rolling Dice and playing cards does
that generalize to the rest of physical
reality
or is it just a kind of useful
mathematical tool sometimes is it as
David Deutsch has said is it mistaking a
misconception called signal detection
Theory with the real process of the same
name there might be a real process of
the same name signal detection Theory
which isn't really analogous to the
problems had with early versions of
radar after all today today what do you
do well you have multiple Radars there's
checking of these things there's various
ways of correcting to see whether or not
what's being detected on the radar
really is what is being detected on the
radar namely you don't only use radar
these days you're going to use satellite
imagery and different wavelengths of
light and sound and sonar and so on and
so forth one can imagine with technology
today not having to worry about whether
or not the radar has detected the right
thing or not because you have multiple
Radars and you have multiple other
systems doing the checking but in any
case what we're after here and you know
what the point point of the chapter is
to figure out are we seeing something in
reality or is it noise is it a true
signal or is it an error okay that's a
fair question as Pinker asks are we
being attacked by nuclear bombers or is
it a flock of seagulls okay so his
question there is is a fair one okay but
in real life in real life let's imagine
if this situation arises do we only have
one radar picking up this stuff
is radar today so insensitive so
imperfect it would mistake A Flock of
Seagulls for an incoming
intercontinental ballistic missile is
there satellite technology that makes
the radar signal just one among many
other different ways of Imaging what's
going on on the ground is there a reason
we have for thinking the
intercontinental ballistic missile is
heading towards us or have we just
detected something on the radar is the
computer system that is able to
interpret whatever the signals are from
the radar able to actually interpret
things better than what a human can
because these days apparently this is
true of much technology but the
technology has actually got a better hit
rate in during that being able to
diagnose stuff than what a person can
apparently this happens in medicine now
routinely that the the machine can
detect the tumor the existence of a a
tumor more reliably than the radiologist
or the radiographer can and indeed
that's the next thing that Pinker said
is he goes on to say so these are this
is the list of the problems quote a
radiologist sees a blob on a scan does
the patient have cancer or is it a
harmless cyst end quote so in that real
life situation again what are we going
to do in real life we're going to take
multiple images and we're going to
possibly use multiple instruments as
well mistakes will still happen but are
we going to do statistical analysis are
we really going to do that is that
what's going to happen is the
radiologist and the doctor going to pull
out the pocket calculator to try and
figure out their confidence level using
Bayesian reasoning as to whether or not
the cancerous cancer or it's a harmless
cyst as far as I know what goes on is
you take a biopsy you take a sample to
figure it out before you start cutting a
lot out of people Pinker goes on quote a
jury hears eyewitness testimony in a
trial is the defendant guilty or did the
witness misremember we meet a person who
seems Vaguely Familiar have we met her
before or is it a free-floating Pang of
deja vu a group of patients improves
after taking a drug did the drug do
anything or was it a placebo effect and
quote all of these cases require us to
have good explanations and if we lack a
good explanation then we just don't know
we just don't know and repeating our
observations our mistaken absorber
observations doesn't help as for the
last one there that's a that's one
really worth talking about I'm lingering
over for a moment the question there was
did the drug do anything or was it a
placebo effect I was surprised in recent
years by following the work of a Dr Mark
krislip who has a wonderful podcast I
used to listen to his podcast quack cast
quite regularly where he would go into
alternative therapies and the the basis
for these alternative therapies whether
they're reliable or not you think things
like acupuncture things like Homeopathy
okay things we know didn't have much of
a good explanation behind them let alone
any studies that sort of suggest
yesterday are efficacious at all he has
a whole bunch of podcasts actually but
anyway one of the blog posts I remember
reading from him and a couple of his
episodes was about how the placebo
effect isn't even a real thing there is
no placebo effect for for almost any
medicine you can think of it has an
objective effect on people or it does
not there is no placebo effect now
everyone thinks of course there's a
placebo effect you know you you can give
someone a sugar pill and they feel
better but that's not what medicine is
about typically speaking okay a person
comes in and they've got dangerously
high blood pressure you give them a
blood pressure tablet you don't ask them
after the blood pressure tablet how do
you feel or you might of course ask them
how you feel but the the objective
measure is you take their blood pressure
you take their blood pressure and you
check to see okay has it Fallen back
down into a non-dangerous level in which
case it doesn't matter whether the
person says they feel good or feel or
don't feel good well okay if they don't
feel good and that's a problem but if
they do feel good but the blood pressure
is still high it doesn't matter there is
no placebo effect it hasn't caused the
person's blood pressure to go down or
consider a vaccine is there any such
thing as the placebo effect from the
vaccine that you give someone a fake
vaccine and it prevents them from being
infected by the virus of course not an
antibiotic is going to either kill the
bacteria or not okay there's no Placebo
effective but I know what people think
people think well okay in some cases
you've got a mild headache and then
you're given a sugar pill and then you
you've got the placebo effect okay it
helps you feel better well again that's
a subjective measure okay and Mark
Crystal points this out if the placebo
effect is nothing but just a subjective
feeling this isn't objective medicine
about which is quite right okay if it's
if it's all about just making people
feel a little bit better then fine okay
call it what you like but it's not a
genuine objective effect that you can
measure in the world except by asking
people survey questions but this is
typically not what you go to a doctor
for you want to go to the doctor to cure
the disease or to prevent getting some
disease to remove the tumor it's not
merely about feeling better I know that
people talk in this way but really what
it's about is fixing the problem curing
the problem which isn't always just
about feeling better there is no such
thing as a placebo effect for infection
for tumors for broken legs and so on
so in that sense the the drugs are known
to either do something or not do
something because you have an objective
measure the blood pressure changes the
infection is gone and importantly
there's a mechanism of action known
mechanism of action known so the the
drug is that we know how the particular
drugs kill the bacteria or prevent the
virus from ever taking hold in someone's
body let's keep going and Pinker writes
quote the output of statistical decision
theory is not a degree of credence but
an actionable decision to have surgery
or not to convict or acquit in coming
down on one side or the other we are not
deciding what to believe about the state
of the world we're committing to an
action in expectation of its likely
costs and benefits end quote but are we
really the output of statistical
decision theory is not a degree of
credence but an actionable decision to
have surgery on it no
this idea of to have surgery or not is
not down to statistical decision Theory
it's down to a good explanation as to
whether or not you need that surgical
intervention or not the doctor May of
course consult studies that say you know
that that this particular procedure 90
of the time is effective or not but in
general they don't need to because
they're an expert in the field so
they're they're performing an operation
that they know works because they've
done it x amount of times before and a
expert in performing this particular
operation they know they know that it
works regardless of what the statistics
are okay these things surely are
published and so on and so forth but for
an individual person a patient sitting
in front of them we're not talking
decision theory in this way we're
talking about you have a tumor in your
left arm we've got a few options here
we've taken a biopsy the thing is
malignant we can remove it surgically or
you can have radiation therapy or you
can have chemotherapy this is not a
discussion about statistics the decision
comes down to how to remove this tumor
and what the best ways are and you are
talking to a specific expert and you
might get another opinion from another
expert but in all cases they're giving
you you want to hope they're giving you
good explanations about what this thing
is if if the second expert says oh Dr
so-and-so said it's a malignant cancer I
think it's just a cyst well then you
want a third opinion don't you and you
personally want to see the results of
the biopsy you want to see the pathology
report about what this thing is now
you're not going to take anyone's word
for it and again it's not down to
statistics to convict or acquit I would
want to Hope I would want to hope that
if someone is accusing a person of a
crime that it's not coming down to
statistics it's coming down to a good
explanation about whether or not the
evidence is explained by this person
having committed the crime or not and
therefore to be convicted or not in
which case acquitted again not
statistics and no one on the jury should
be thinking statistics they should be
thinking do I have a good explanation
about what's going on here never mind
the statistics I don't know whether
statistics would ever even come into
this I don't know jurors who are again
pulling out their pocket calculators
drawing graphs and so on about the
amount and preponderance of evidence
they're talking about how the evidence
is explained best explained now the next
section of this chapter is a quite long
discussion about the normal distribution
and what the normal distribution is it's
kind of a primer I suppose for anyone
who's never studied introductory
statistics now as Illuminating as this
is and useful in some circumstances as
it is
I don't find it generally applicable to
decision making or to explanation
creating anything like this there are
situations where people are interested
in the normal distribution statisticians
and so on and so forth but in general
it's not lawyers Consulting
statisticians it's not physicist
Consulting statisticians it's not
doctors Consulting statisticians it's
not Pilots Consulting statisticians when
problems need to be solved these are
separate domains I remember when I
myself taught mathematics and the
mathematics of the normal distribution
and we'd have things that we talked
about like Zed scores and the standard
deviation and whenever the textbook
tried the conjure problems the examples
that were used were always very abstract
or at least very narrow in the possible
ways in which they could be applied to
real life scenarios in school-based and
even university-based discussions the
examples were always something like in a
particular maths test the average Mark
was 60 percent with a standard deviation
of 15 John scores 82 percent in this
particular exam what percentage of
students did he perform better than in
this particular test stuff like this
these are the kind of examples where the
normal distribution was deployed in
order to provide information that was
supposedly useful to a particular user
of this kind of statistical data but how
often is that kind of thing applicable
to the problems of chemistry and physics
and real life science and the legal
system and what police or doctors do I
don't know and therefore how often is it
useful for people in making decisions
actual decisions can Pinker do anything
with this kind of stuff well he spends
quite a while explaining what the normal
distribution is and I think because well
he's a psychologist again and so this is
what they do they survey people and they
say well their heights fit into a normal
distribution their intelligences fit
into a normal distribution their
attractiveness fits into a normal
distribution so look we're seeing normal
distributions everywhere because we're
studying people and people range across
certain features where there's always an
average that can be calculated in some
way shape or form which apparently
they're interested in this kind of thing
and people like to know whether they're
below the average or above their average
in terms of height intelligence and
attractiveness and so on and so forth
let's see what is said in this part of
the book about this stuff he says quote
how should we think about some erratic
indicator of the state of the world
begin with the concept of a statistical
distribution suppose we measure
something that varies unpredictably a
random variable like scores on a test of
introversion from 0 to 100 we set the
scores into bins 0 to 9 10 to 19 and so
on and we count the number of people who
fall into each bin now we stack them
into a histogram a graph that differs
from the usual ones we see in that the
variable of interest is plotted along
the horizontal axis rather than the
vertical one end quote okay and so then
he moves from the histogram way of
representing things to well now imagine
that we test several million people with
this same test of so-called introversion
these tests always annoying me by the
way it's like I used to say to my
lecturers and I think I might have
mentioned this on the podcast before if
you gave me the survey in the morning
I'd get a particular score on the
personality test and then if you gave me
the test in the middle of the day I got
a particular score and then if you gave
me the test on a Friday night I got a
different score still people have moods
my my personality apparently was widely
changing even though I think I'm a
relatively stable person which made me
think even at this stage this was like
first year university encountering some
early ideas about psychology that this
entire field just seemed to me to be
grappling with something in the wrong
way trying to measure that which
couldn't be measured exactly
introversion is one such thing what does
it really mean anyway so people can do a
survey and they can score something and
if you survey a million such people then
what tends to happen is that you have
this
smooth distribution of variation when it
comes to introversion only a very few
people are very introverted and only a
very few people are highly extroverted
most people are clustered near the
middle and so you have this normal
distribution okay the bell-shaped curve
Pinker makes a big deal about how common
this bell-shaped curve is in reality
okay very well he says of them quote
these bell-shaped curves arise whenever
a measurement is the sum of a large
number of small causes like many genes
together with many environmental
influences and he goes on quote let's
turn to the subject at hand observations
of whether or not something happened in
the world we can't Define it perfectly
we are not God but only through our
measurements such as blips on a Raider
screen coming from an aircraft or the
opacity of blobs on a scan from a tumor
our measurements don't come out
precisely the same on the dot every time
instead they tend to be distributed in a
bell curve end quote well is that quite
right under the papyrian framework of
looking at these things
observations on whether or not something
happened in the world we only get that
through our measurements he says hmm
observations are theory-laden we get
observations through our explanations of
the observation process it's not simply
go out into the world and look or
measure we have to have a theory of how
our measuring devices work or how our
observation works and what we should be
looking for all of this stuff comes
first the Theory comes first and while
it is true when he says that if you make
a measurement then if you repeat the
measurement he's sort of implying that
here then the measurement will cluster
around the signal the True Value one
should hope but is that true what we're
getting there is increased Precision of
a particular measurement but that does
not mean we're getting actual accuracy
of a particular measurement accuracy is
what is the true value of what you're
looking at what is the reality now of
course you can't know the reality and
pink is quite right about that we can't
Define it perfectly we're not God but he
may be misinterpreting what all this
stuff is about confusing Precision for
accuracy what do I mean I've talked
about this before let's say you want to
measure the height of someone
and I think I've mentioned how we used I
used to do this as a physics teacher you
can measure the height of students and
you can say to groups of students hey go
and measure your height okay use
whatever technique you want use rulers
whatever and sometimes I would do the
somewhat deceptive for the purp for a
pedagogical reason Act of measuring
someone really precisely over and over
again using rulers using tape measures
using some sort of laser apparatus thing
taking a video putting it onto a
computer screen and using the computer
software to do a full measurement of
this person's height highly precisely
repeating the measurement over and over
again by the way for anyone who doesn't
do who hasn't done physics before
whether at school or university this is
one of the most boring things that
physics students do you would take some
Vernier calipers or perhaps a micrometer
and measure very precisely something
like the diameter of a metal sphere now
the Curious thing is if you get down to
a highly precise measurement that you
repeat the measurement of exactly the
same sphere using exactly the same
instrument and it often wouldn't come
out exactly the same each time that's a
curious thing just about instruments and
physics and when you get down to really
precise measurements whatever the case
but let's say we're measuring the height
of Mary in the classroom and we've got
her up the front of the class and she's
up against the wall and we're trying to
figure out how tall she is and we get 10
different students to measure Mary's
height and they all tend to Cluster
around
161 centimeters but not exactly we've
got some people who say it's 161.5
someone who says it's
162.0 some people who say it's 160
centimeters so we've got this range but
they're clustering around a particular
value of about 161 centimeters tall so
do we conclude that the reality is 161
centimeters tall that's the most precise
measurement that we can have and we can
say something like 161 plus or minus two
centimeters okay so it's somewhere in
that range of 161 plus two so 163 is the
highest possible height she could have
all the way down to
159 centimeters tall so she might be as
short as that but she's somewhere in
that range and we expect the expected
value is right there in the middle of
161 centimeters tall so is she somewhere
in that value well we don't know we can
be as precise as we like and we can
continue to repeat that measurement over
and over again using all the fancy
apparatus in the world clustering ever
more closely to 161 centimeters maybe
eventually after a million such
measurements we end up with
161.025 centimeters tall we think we are
highly precise and if you were to read
explanations such as appear in this book
rationality about how measurement is
done you might think well now we're
being very accurate we're getting closer
and closer to the truth but we might not
be
because there are different kinds of
areas we can make in the world the era
of how big the error bar is so to speak
so when we say it's 161 plus or minus
two centimeters we're talking there
about the random error and the random
error can be made smaller by simply
repeating the experiment over and over
again and making that small and smaller
so instead of 161 plus or minus two
centimeters a more precise reading would
be 161 plus or minus one centimeter that
would be a better reading a smaller
margin of error so to speak as people
call it however and here's the key
here's the key for science
this particular measurement might be
completely inaccurate completely
inaccurate way off and why because our
methodology of measuring might be wrong
our theory of measurement might be wrong
our theory of observation might be wrong
observations are theoret and measurement
is theoret and evidence is Theory
related and we need to understand the
theory of what we're doing pretty well
before we go around reporting with high
confidence what we think is the truth
and here when we're measuring Mary's
height and we're saying it's 161
centimeters and we are very confident
because we've been highly precise and
we've been using lasers and repeated
this experiment over and over again and
in fact we've got fancy statistics that
tell us that with the five Sigma
confidence level we can be sure because
of the millions of repeat experiments
we've done that her height is
161.025 centimeters or something like
that you get my point I'm overregging it
and I'm overregging it for a good reason
and listeners to topcast will know
what's coming next Mary
failed to take off her shoes and no one
noticed that she didn't take off her
shoes we never wanted the whole point of
the experiment was to determine Mary's
height not Mary's height plus shoes that
wasn't the question there could be a
thousand and one different ways in which
Mary's height is completely inaccurate
because we failed to account for
something no one thought of during the
methodology namely if you want someone's
height the first thing that you should
do is ask them to remove their shoes and
if you don't ask them to remove the
issues and they walk away later on and
they throw those shoes away and you've
got nothing but the record of this data
the data is completely useless you can
never correct it because you don't know
how tall the shoes were so how can you
know how tall Mary is given Justice data
it's highly precise
but completely inaccurate completely
divorced from the truth because there's
an error there that you never corrected
you never knew about because your
methodology was wrong you didn't
understand your own theory of measuring
something as simple as someone's height
and this is just measuring the height of
someone
can you imagine what goes on in real
life science well we know what goes on
in real life science we know there's
been errors in methodology we try as
hard as we can to avoid those errors but
we can't at times because this is what
it means to make a systematic error a
systematic error is an error with the
methodology
and if there's an error in the
methodology that you aren't aware of and
this can always be the situation always
you can't guard against these things
these are things these are phenomenal
that are going on in the background that
you're not aware of yet Perhaps that's
why you need to be careful and critical
and never be certain that you're being
accurate accuracy is a measurement of
closeness to truth you can't know how
close to the truth you are precisely for
this reason that when you measure or
observe something you don't know if
there's an error not being made in the
background something as trivial as the
an analog 2 Mary keeping her shoes on
when her height is being measured and if
she walks away and she takes her shoes
off you can never correct for that here
are my two preferred stories about that
again listeners to top cast would have
heard these before both from physics one
mentioned in the beginning of infinity
and one that I've talked about because
it was involving some lecturers of my
own and the people that I looked up to
and thought these are brilliant people
and they are but they made a mistake and
well this happens in science and in fact
this was kind of a good mistake because
it allowed them to develop special
techniques of measurement even though
initially their conclusions were quite
false the story is this researchers at
the University of New South Wales
astrophysicists were pointing telescopes
at the sky and measuring using
spectroscopy the absorption of light
from distant quasars as it traveled
towards the Earth and along the way
passed through distant galaxies and as
that light from Those Distant quasars
passed through those galaxies it was
absorbed by clouds of gas in those
distant galaxies and when it arrived we
were able to analyze it using our
telescope spectroscopes and computers
now what these physicists did was
something really interesting they looked
at the distance between the absorption
lines and the distance between the the
absorption lines tell us something about
the what's known as the fine structure
constant the fine structure constant is
a dimensionless constant made up of
other constants made up of the the the
speed of light and Planck's Constant and
the charge on an electron so these
things together in a certain fancy
formula give you the fine structure
constant a measurement of the force the
strength of the force between the
nucleus and the electrons so it's
something to do with this electrostatic
force now this is supposed to be
constant throughout the entire universe
it would be a great turn up for the
books if we started finding differences
in the value of this fine structure
constant this is what they were looking
for and this is what they found they
found a difference in distant galaxies
the value of the fine structure constant
in distant galaxies by analyzing the
Spectra of absorption light of the light
that have been absorbed the absorption
spectra when image by telescopes it's
broken up by spectroscopes put into a
computer and they carefully measured the
distance between these lines these
spectral absorption lines using the
computer when compared with similar
Spectra in the laboratory there was a
difference the fine structure constant
was different in those distant galaxies
which means it was different in the past
and this different further away this was
so exciting now at the time I was a much
younger person and a more naive
physicist I suppose and I thought aha
this is you know evidence of something
like seeing other universes perhaps
we're able to see a place where the laws
of physics were subtly changing and if
you could look even further the fine
structure constant would be different
again more different the further you
looked the more different the fine
structure constant would be and of
course these physicists repeated the
experiment over and over and over again
and they had other people checking their
results over and over and over again
they were using the Keck telescopes they
were using fancy stuff these people were
from prestigious universities they
understood what they were doing
or did they because although they
published many papers and they got a lot
of publicity and prestigious not only
science journals but also popular
science magazines it was an exciting
time of thinking the fine structure
constant might not be a constant these
constants of nature might very well vary
across the universe it had long been
thought that perhaps the value of G the
universal gravitational constant could
be different in different parts of the
universe there was no Theory there was
no theory about why it should be but hey
maybe we could measure this and this
would be an interesting this would be a
problem in the papyrian sense it would
be a problem to be explained it
shouldn't be regarded as a refutation of
the claim that the constants really are
constants because what do we say when we
make a measurement like this either yeah
the constants might in fact be varying
or
there's a problem with the measurement
there's been a systematic error made
somewhere and yes that's the punch line
it took them many years to correct the
error but another team did they figured
out what was wrong something to do with
the mirror of the Keck reflecting
telescope they weren't calibrated
properly or there was an insufficient
understanding of the actual telescope
itself and how it was making the
measurements that it made making the
observations that it made and so all of
this talk about seeing far distant
reaches of the universe and peering into
possibly other universes other regions
of space obeying different physical laws
disappeared vanished into a puff of
systematic error and so it wasn't true
and so now although these visitors did
indeed develop a precise technique for
making these kind of measurements
they didn't actually measure what they
thought they'd measured and what would
have been the exciting kind of
measurement so all the statistical
analysis in the world that they did
quoting how confident they were because
they'd repeated the same experiment over
and over again getting the same results
over and over again meaning they become
statistically more confident they quote
Sigma levels and higher Sigma levels at
that
it was highly precise
but completely inaccurate it was wrong
the fund structure constant was not
changing now a similar thing happened
and was reported in the beginning of
infinity David Deutsch talks about the
occasion where it was said that at the
Large Hadron Collider certain
experiments had shown that neutrinos
were traveling faster than light in
violation of Einstein's theory of
special relativity nothing no matter can
go faster than the speed of light or at
least if it's traveling at sub light
speed it should never at any point
travel at the speed of light but here
were neutrinos which have mass however
small traveling beyond the speed of
light apparently and many reported at
the time okay the the Popular Science
was saying Einstein proved wrong you
know the the the classic headline that
comes through in these situations where
of course the correct headline is
problem for physicists what's going on
here maybe just maybe general relativity
and special relativity have a problem or
just maybe this experiment contains
within it a mistake in a methodology a
systematic error which takes a long time
to try and figure out an old amount of
repeating the experiment over and over
again and getting the same results as
ever going to correct a problem with the
methodology and you don't know that
there's a problem with the methodology
unless some clever person comes along
and points out what's wrong with your
methodology so it's not that
extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence it's that
extraordinary explanations behind them
this is the key it's not about just
repeating your experiment over and over
again and collecting this astonishing
amazing evidence it's about being able
to account for this astonishing evidence
with an astonishing explanation of
what's going on or perhaps a mundane
explanation but you need a good
explanation of why it is that this
long-standing good explanation of
physical reality is now being pushed
aside for something better evidence
alone won't do that you need an
explanation of the evidence evidence
that contradicts a good explanation does
not refute the good explanation does not
successfully refute the good explanation
it's merely a problem to be explained
and so this is one of the difficulties
here with this book rationality I don't
think it quite grapples with precisely
that
this this discussion of signal and noise
it kind of talks about okay well you're
seeing a signal but is the signal really
telling you even if you're repeatedly
getting the signal is that telling you
something true about reality or is it
telling you that in fact something about
your methodology has gone wrong after
all in the two examples I gave the
signal was extremely strong extremely
strong that the fine structure constant
was varying throughout the Universe the
signal was extremely strong that
neutrinos were traveling faster than
light and repeating the observations
over and over again and getting a
cluster of measurements with a binomial
distribution that showed that there was
a signal didn't matter ultimately
because the methodology was wrong how do
you know your methodology is wrong that
is a harder question and that is
something that I'm going to have to come
back to next episode because I think
we've talked for long enough about just
a few pages here into this particular
chapter all about hits and false alarms
because the false alarm about whether or
not your cherished theory has actually
been refuted by a strong signal doesn't
come down to how strong the signal is it
comes down to what your explanation of
the signal is this is missing I think
from this chapter and we'll see more of
that as we move Throughout the chapter
but for now we've talked enough about
this until next time bye-bye
foreign
[Music]